---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter 17"
desc:   "The Role of Government 2: Understanding Money and the Canadian Financial System"
date:   2016-01-12 11:15:00 -0600
category: BUS-1201
permalink: /bus-1201/chapter17/
---

##### Summary
The characteristics and functions of money, and the components of Canada's money
supply. One of these components is the Bank of Canada, whose role is to manage
the money supply. Along with the Bank of Canada, there exist other financial
institutions

---

### Money

*Money* is anything that is acceptable as payment for goods and services

#### Characteristics

**Scarcity:** Money should be scarce enough to give it value, but not so scarce
that its unavailable to the majority of people. *For this reason, pebbles cannot
be money, because pebbles are everywhere.*

**Durability:** Money must be long lasting. *Perishable foods cannot be money.*

**Portability:** Money must be easy to move around.

**Divisibility:** Money should have the ability to be divided into smaller parts,
in order for transactions of all sizes and amounts to be possible.

#### Functions

**Medium of Exchange:** Money makes transactions easier. Money being a common
form of payment is less complicated than the barter system.

**Standard of Value:** The reason money is a good *medium of exchange* is
because it can standardise the value of goods and services, making it easy to
measure the value of products.

**Store of Value:** Because money is a *standard of value*, it is used to hold
wealth, as it retains its value over time.

---

##### Currency
Bank notes and coins used as a medium of exchange.

##### Demand Deposits
Money kept in chequing accounts that can be withdrawn by depositors on demand.

##### Time Deposits
Money invested for a specific period of time.

##### Term Deposits
Deposits at a bank or other financial institution that pay interest but can't be
withdrawn on demand.

---

### The Functions of the Bank of Canada

#### The Canadian Money supply

|**M1:** All the money/cash out there, and demand deposits|**M2:** Includes all of M1, personal savings, etc|**M2+:** Deposits that are non-bank, like credit unions or insurance

#### What does the Bank of Canada do?

**Conduct monetary policy:** One org that sets the standard, makes sure the Canadian dollar consistent

**Supplies bank notes:** All money comes from here, also makes sure that the bank
notes are secure against counterfeiting.

**Promotes safety and efficiency of our financial system:** BoC policy prevented housing bubble by making sure people can pay the down payment and stuff (dunno if that's true or not lol)

**Provides fund-management services:** Assists banks to get their money, like with armored vehicles and stuff.

**Communicates its objectives openly and effectively**

#### Bank of Canada's Tools for Monetary Policy

**Open Market Operations:** Purchase or sale of Canadian government securities
by the Bank of Canada in order to stimulate or slow down the economy.

**Overnight Rate:** Signal from Bank of Canada to major participants in the
money market on what the Bank of Canada's target rate is in the market for
overnight funds.

---

### The Other Key Financial Institutions

#### Depository
- **Chartered Banks:** Profit-oriented financial institution that accepts
deposits, makes business and consumer loans, invests in government and corporate
securities, and provides other financial services.
- **Trust Companies:** The only financial institution that can administer trusts
*TD Canada Trust, used to be 2 companies, TD and Canada Trust*
- **Credit Unions:** Typically small and locally owned, these are Not-For-Profit
member-owned financial cooperatives that operate for the benefit of the members.

#### Non-Depository
- Insurance companies *Major suppliers of funds*
- Pension Funds *Corporations, unions, and governments setting aside large pools
of money to be later used to pay retirement funds to their employees or members*
- Brokerage Companies *buy and sell securities (shares or bonds) for clients and
gives them related advice*
- Finance Companies *don't go here, interest is high, never take out a payday loan*
