---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter 8"
desc:   "Forms of Business Ownership"
date:   2016-02-02 11:15:00
category: BUS-1201
permalink: /bus-1201/chapter8/
---

##### Summary


---

### Advantages and Disadvantages of Sole Proprietorship

##### Sole Proprietorship
A business that is established, owned, operated, and usually financed by one person.

|**Advantages**|**Disadvantages**|
|Easy/inexpensive to form|Unlimited liability|
|Profits go directly to owner|Difficulty in raising capital|
|Direct control|Limited managerial experience|
|Relative freedom from government regulations|Trouble finding qualified employees|
|No corporate taxation|Personal time commitment|
|asy to dissolve|Unstable business life|
||Losses are owner's responsibility|

---

### Advantages and Disadvantages of Partnership

##### Partnership
Association between 2 or more individuals who operate a business together for profit.

**General Partnership:**

**Limited Partnership:**

**Limited Liability Partnership:**

|**Advantages**|**Disadvantages**|
|||
|||
|||
|||
|||
|||

---

### Corporate Structure, Its Advantage and Disadvantages, and Identifying a Special Type of Organization

#### Corporation
Legal entity with an existence and life separate from owners, who are not personally
liable for the entity's debts.

**Public Corporation:** Shares are widely held and available to the general public

**Private Corporation:** Shares are not traded publicly and are not available to
the public.

#### Incorporation Process
1. Select company's name
2. Write incorporation papers
3. Pay required fees and taxes
4. Hold organizational meeting
5. Adopt bylaws, elect directors, pass operating resolutions

|**Advantages**|**Disadvantages**|
|||
|||
|||
|||
|||

#### One-Person Corporation

A corporation with only one person as a shareholder. Common in professional
industries such as medical doctors and lawyers, or trades such as plumbers and electricians.

#### Crown Corporation

Corporation that is owned by the federal or provincial government. *Manitoba
Public Insurance* is an example of a crown corporation.

---

### Other Business Organization Options

#### Cooperative
Legal entities formed by people with similar interest, to reduce costs and gain
economic power.

#### Joint Venture
Two or more companies that form an alliance to pursue a particular project for a
specified time period.

*Like oil companies forming an alliance because a project needs 20 billion dollars
so companies would have shares of that 20 billion or something*

#### Direct Selling

Popular marketing structure that connects the sellers "directly" with the customers.

Examples:
- Avon Canada Inc.
- Herbalife of Canada Ltd.
- The Pampered Chef -- Canada Corp.

---

### Why Mergers and Acquisitions Can Be Important to a Company's Overall Growth

##### Merger
Combination of two or more companies to form a new company, often
taking a new corporate identity.

##### Acquisition
Purchase of a company by another company or investor group.

#### Types of Mergers and Acquisitions
- **Horizontal:** Same industry at the same stage -- *like Burger King buying out
Tim Hortons, both in same industry and are both fairly big corporations*
- **Vertical:** Same industry at a different stage
- **Conglomerate:** Different industry -- *I guess Alphabet would be a conglomerate?**
- **Leveraged Buyout:** A corporate takeover financed by large amounts of borrowed money

---

### Identify When Franchising Is Appropriate, and Why It Is Growing in Importance

#### Franchising: A Popular Trend

Form of business organization based on business arrangement between a franchisor,
who supplies the product concept, and the franchisee, who sells the products of
the franchisor in a certain geographic area.

*Tim Hortons is a franchise that people can open a business with*

|**Advantages**|**Disadvantages**|
|||
|||
|||
|||

---

### List Trends That Could Affect Business Organizations in The Future

- Joining forces (mergers and acquisitions)
- Baby boomers rewrite rules of retirement
- More  franchise innovations

---

### Term Test 1
50 Multiple Choice, 5-6 short answer (do only 2). Need photo id. No hoodies
