---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter 3"
desc:   "Ethics and Social Responsibility"
date:   2016-01-26 11:15:00 -0600
category: BUS-1201
permalink: /bus-1201/chapter3/
---

##### Summary


---

### Identifying Current Social Factors that have an impact on business

##### Social Trends
Social change and its impact on business.

##### Social Responsibility
The responsibility a business has to its stakeholders.

##### Ethics
Set of moral standards for judging whether an action is right or wrong.

##### Component Lifestyle
Lifestyle made up of a complex set of interests, needs, and choices.

#### Current Social Factors
- **Social Factors:**
  - Attitudes
  - Values
  - Lifestyles
- **Different lifestyles, different choices:**
- **Women's contribution to the Canadian economy:** A contributing factor to the
evolution of component lifestyles is the number of women in the workforce.
- **Demographic Trends:**
  - Age
    - *Generation Z:* Canadians born from late 1990s onward.
    - *Generation Y:* Canadians born between about 1977 and 1997.
    - *Generation X:* Canadians born between 1964 and 1977.
  - Race
  - Ethnicity
  - Location

#### Diversity in Canada

##### Multiculturalism
Fundamental belief that all citizens are equal regardless of their racial or
ethnic backgrounds.

---

### How Businesses Meet Social Responsibility to Stakeholders

Priorities of Business:
1. **Economic Responsibility:** Corporations must be profitable to survive,
therefore its economic wellbeing is of utmost priority.

2. **Legal Responsibility:** Corporations must abide by the law. In order to be
successful, laws must be considered necessary to a corporation's success.

3. **Ethical Responsibility:** After 1 and 2 are fulfilled, the corporation can
focus on ethical issues within itself.

4. **Philanthropic Responsibility:** When the entire corporation fine in the rest
of these aspects, it can then focus on helping people outside of the corporation.

#### Stakeholders
Individuals, groups, or organizations to whom a business has a responsibility.

**Employees:** Organization's first responsibility is to provide jobs for employees.

Employers must provide a clean and safe working environment that is free from all
forms of discrimination. Good companies also empower employees.

**Customers:** Companies must deliver their promises.

**Investors:** Corporations must appease the wants of investors. Investors of
present day tend to be less passive than in the past. They use tactics such as
exposes on media to pressure corporations into increasing profits and ousting
inefficient management.

**Suppliers:** Companies rely on other companies for their survival. Businesses
should support their suppliers as their services or products can/are essential
to their own business.

**Government:** Corporations are expected to accurately report their earnings
and fulfill their tax obligations. Another obligation is to ensure that their
company operates in a safe and reasonable manner.

**Society:** A business provides a community with jobs, goods, and services. It
also pays taxes that go towards supporting infrastructure like schools, roads,
and hospitals. It is important that businesses be good stewards of the
environment.

---

### Corporate Governance

The way which an organization is governed, directed, and administered. The board
of directors is responsible for the management of the organization.

Canadian society is concerned about the accountability of the board of directors,
so the government has strict regulations and closely analyzes the actions of the
board of directors.

Stakeholders look at corporate governance to ensure they are being managed with
the interest of stakeholders in mind.

---

### Philosophies and Concepts that shape personal ethic standards

*Individual business ethics* shaped by personal choices and environments in which
we live and work.

**Utilitarianism:** Philosophy that focuses on the consequences of an action to
determine whether it is right or wrong, and holds that an action that affects the
majority negatively is morally wrong.

*The greatest good for the greatest number of people*

**Individual Rights:** In our society, individuals have certain rights under
certain conditions regardless of external circumstances. In Canada, the *Canadian
Charter of Rights and Freedoms* was enacted to guarantee the rights and freedoms
of Canadians.

Some freedoms listed in this charter:
- freedom of conscience and religion
- freedom of though, belief, opinion, and expression (press and other communications media)
- freedom of peaceful assembly

*Human rights that imply that certain rights are conveyed at birth and cannot be
taken away*

**Justice:** what is fair according to prevailing standards of society.

*Equal distribution of the burdens and rewards that a society has to offer*

#### Stages Ethical Development

**Preconventional (Selfish):** childlike in nature; it is calculating, self-centered,
and even selfish, and is based on the possibility of immediate punishment or reward.

**Selfish (Social):** moves from an egocentric viewpoint toward the expectations of society.

**Postconventional (Principled):** represents the ethical standards of the mature
adult. Businesspeople are concerned less about how others might see them and more
about how they see and judge themselves over the long run.

---

### How organizations encourage ethical business behaviour

**Leading by Example:** Leaders and managers establish patterns of behaviour
that determine what's acceptable and what's not within the organization.

**Offer Ethics Training Programs:** Provide formal training for employees to help
them develop an awareness of questionable business activities and practice
appropriate responses.

**Establishing a Formal Code of Ethics:** In general, a code of ethics provides
employees with the knowledge of what their company expects in terms of their
responsibilities and behaviour toward fellow employees, customers, and suppliers.

---

### Trends in Society Corporate Responsibility, and Ethics

- Experiences Workers in High Demand
- Growth of Social Responsibility
- Occupy Movements
- Global Ethics and Social Responsibility
