---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter 1"
desc:   "The Role of Government 1"
date:   2016-01-07 11:15:00 -0600
category: BUS-1201
permalink: /bus-1201/chapter1/
---

The role of the Canadian government in business. Each level of the government
has their own responsibilities that affect businesses both locally and globally.
The Canadian government also has a strong influence on the ethics and legality
of businesses to ensure a high standard of living for Canadian citizens.
{: .first}

---

##### Business
An organization striving for profit through providing desired goods and services
to customers.

##### Standard of Living
The country's goods and services that the people can buy with their money.

##### Quality of Life
The general level of human happiness using metrics such as life expectancy,
education standards, sanitation, and leisure time.

##### Risk
The <del>CLG</del> potential for losing resources, such as time or money, or simply being
unable to accomplish the organization's goals

---

#### Revenue - Costs = Profit

|:-:|
|**Revenue:** Money earned by company|**Cost:** Expenses needed to generate revenue|**Profit:** The difference between revenue and cost

*Not-For-Profit organizations do not care about profit. But, they still follow
sound business principles in order to be successful*

---

### Levels of Government

#### Federal

##### Oversees the Well-Being of Canada

- Money and Banking *fiscal policy and taxation/spending*
- Trade Regulation *tariffs, NAFTA, etc*
- External Relations *who on good/bad terms with, like good term with US*
- Defense
- Criminal Law *like drinking and driving*
- Transportation *things that cross over provincial/country borders like airplanes*

#### Provincial

##### Protection of Rights

- labour laws *minimum wage, vacations, statutory holidays, overtime, etc*
- education
- health/welfare *medicare, don't have to pay for most medical things, unlike in US where you'd be banking just entering the hospital*
- protection of property and civil rights *can move anywhere, in his example of soviet union one city was naval base, when tensions where high, needed permission to leave city for vacation*
- natural resources *belongs to province, like oil belongs to Alberta, not the whole of Canada*
- environment *making sure everything is healthy like water*

#### Municipal

##### Providing Services

- water, sewer, waste collection *before 2 metal garbage cans, now we have 1 for garbage, 1 for recycling*
- encourage economic development *like ikea, city spent money on infrastructure to make it want to come here, now other stores are coming in near ikea*
- use bylaws to regulate *not cutting grass, or shoveling sidewalk, etc*

#### Other

##### Roles the government plays that aren't necessarily bound by their government level

- Customer *Road builders' main customer is the government*
- Competition *liquor in a few places, beer anywhere, etc*
- Providing essential services *water, sewer, etc*
- Provide incentives *employment insurance during downtime while taking courses
  or training, or student loans to encourage studying for better opportunities*
- Tax *Ensure that people/orgs pay for gov provided services in order to maintain them*
- Regulator *like making seatbelts necessary, airbags, glass structure, in cars*

---

### Why should the government be able to regulate my business?
*Because in exchange, the government can protect businesses and consumers.*

#### Businesses:

- **Patents:** Protection of inventors. Gives exclusive rights to the production,
usage, and sale of an invention to the inventor. *like Apple vs Samsung, terrible example imo*
- **Copyrights:** Protection of owners of intellectual property for their
lifetime + 50 years after their death. Intellectual property includes works of art, music, literature *when radio plays someone's song, they have to pay*
- **Trademarks:** Design, name, logo that  manufacturer uses to identify its products. *corner of Sherbrook and something there was HFC (some thing fried chicken), same colors, and font of the logo, obviously KFC didn't like that*, *Apple and Apple records had same logo*, *Bricks, and another local Brick furniture place thing*

#### Consumers:

- **Right of choice:** Must have choice on all the things, no one wants a Comcast
- **Right of safety:** Fucking idiots man. Products need to have all sorts of labels on their products to protect themselves
- **Right of honesty:** Like tobacco. Even if product was used as intended, its going to harm us.
- **Right to be informed:** Products must have disclaimers. Businesses must be honest *GM Motors cars were shutting off, GM Motors knew about it, but sold them anyways*

---

##### Consumerism:
A movement to increase rights of buyers in relation to sellers.

##### Warranties:
Guarantee of performance of the product by the seller. *Express Warranties* are
guarantees explicitly noted by the seller, *Implicit Warranties* are guarantees
imposed by the court, promising that the product willperform up to expected
standards.

##### Product Liability:
Manufacturers and vendors are liable for the defects in the products they make
and sell.


##### Strict Liability:
A concept with-in the product liability law under which a manufacturer is liable
for personal injuries or property damage caused by defect in a product or
packaging that does not meet industry standards.

---

#### Taxes Paid by Businesses
- Income
- Property
- Payroll *when +1 million, have to pay tax*
- Sales
- Excise *like booze or tobacco, to make people not want to buy them*

---

#### Trends of politics and government roles
- Increased interest/investment in clean tech *get money off for using geothermal, certain clean cars give you rebates, etc*
- Increase demand for skilled labour *but immigrant people with skill are being told they have to redo the education or something*
- Expectation of transparency in marketing, operations, corporate social responsibility.
