---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter 2"
desc:   "Economics Evolving Systems"
date:   2016-01-17 11:15:00 -0600
category: BUS-1201
permalink: /bus-1201/chapter2/
---

##### Summary


---

### Explain what economics is and how the three sectors of the economy are linked

##### Economics
The study of how society uses scarce resources to produce and distribute goods
and services

##### Microeconomics
The sub-area of economics that focuses on individual parts of the economy, such
as households or firms

##### Macroeconomics
The sub-area of economics that focuses on the economy as a whole by looking at
aggregate data for large groups of people, companies, or products.

---

#### Factors of Productions: The Building Blocks of Business

Factors of production are the resources used to create goods and services.

**Natural Resources:** Commodities that are useful in their natural state.
*Farmland, forests, mineral, oil deposits, and water are some examples.*

**Labour:** Economic contributions of people working with their minds and muscles.

**Capital:** Tools, machinery, equipment, and buildings used to produce goods
and services and get them to the consumer.

**Knowledge:**

**Entrepreneurship:** People who combine the rest of these factors to produce
goods or services with the intention of making a profit.

---

### Primary Features of Economic Systems

##### What is an economic system?
An economic system is the combination of policies, laws, and choices made by the
a nations' governments to establish the systems that determine what goods and
services are produced and how they are allocated.

**Market Economy:** Also known as *Private Enterprise System* or *Capitalism*,
is based on competition in the marketplace and private ownership of the factors
of production (resources).

A market economy guarantees certain economic rights: the right to own property,
the right to make a profit, the right to make free choices, and the right to compete.

*Factors owned and allocated by the marketplace*

**Command Economy:** On the opposite end of the spectrum, often called *Planned
Economy* or *Central Planning*, the government owns virtually all resources and
controls all markets.

The government, rather than competition, decides what and how much to produce,
where to locate production facilities, where to acquire raw materials and
supplies, who will get the output, and  what the prices will be.

*Factors owned and allocated by the government*

**Socialism:** An economy where basic industries are owned by the government or
by the private sector, but under strong government control.

*Factors owned and allocated by the government in major industries (such as
transportation)*

**Mixed Economies:** Using more than one economic system.

*Some degree of the two or all three of the above*

---

### Four Types of Market Structure

The number of suppliers in a market.

**Perfect Competition:**
- Large number of small business in the market
- Businesses sell similar products (the products of 2 businesses are very much
similar to each other)
- Buyers and sellers in the market have good information about prices, sources
of supply
- Easy to open a new business or close an existing one

**Monopolistic Competition:**
- Many businesses are in the market
- The businesses offer products that are close substitutes but still differ from
another
- It is relatively easy to enter the market

**Oligopoly:**
- Few companies produce most or all of the output
- Large capital requirements or other factors limit the number of companies

**Pure Monopoly:** The market structure in which a single company accounts for
all industry sales. There is a large *barrier to entry* -- factors prevent new
companies from competing equally with the existing company. These factors are
often technical or legal conditions.

---

### Basic Microeconomic Concepts of Demand and Supply

#### The Nature of Demand
**Demand:** the quantity of a good or service that people are willing to buy at
various prices. Demand is critical to businesses because it indicates how much
can be sold and at one price

**Demand Curve:** A graph showing the quantity of a good or service that people
are willing to buy at a various prices

#### The Nature of Supply
**Supply:** The quantity of a good or service that businesses will make available
at various prices.

**Supply Curve:** A graph showing the quantity of a good or service that a
business will make available at various prices.

#### Equilibrium
The point at which quantity demanded equals quantity supplied.

|**Changes in Demand**                 |**Changes in Supply**                |
|- change in customer income           |- new technology                     |
|- changes in fashion or taste         |- change in price of resources       |
|- change in price of related products |- change in price of related products|
|- expectations about future prices    |- change in number of producers      |
|- change in number of buyers          |- change in taxes                    |

---

### How Economic Growth, Full Employment, and Price Stability Indicate A Nation's Economic Health

#### Macroeconomic Main Goals

##### Striving for Economic Growth
Increase in a nation's output of goods and services.

**Gross National Product (GNP):** Measures what is produced by the nation
regardless of where the factors of production are located.

**Gross Domestic Product (GDP):** Total market value of all final goods and
services produced within a nation's borders in a year.

**Business Cycles:**
An increase in business activity results in a rise in:

- Output
- Income
- Employment
- Prices

*Eventually these all peak and decline*

##### Full Employment
Having jobs for all who want to and are able to work.

Types of Unemployment:

**Frictional:** Short-term unemployment unrelated to the business cycle. This
unemployment is always present and has little impact on the economy.

**Structural:** Unrelated to the business cycle, but unlike frictional unemployment,
is involuntary.

**Cyclical:** When a downturn in the business cycle reduces demand for labour
throughout the economy.

**Seasonal:** In certain industries, unemployment that occurs during specific seasons.

##### Keeping Prices Steady

**Inflation:** Situation where the average prices of goods and services is rising.

Types of Inflation:
- **Demand-Pull:** Occurs when demand for goods and services is greater than the
supply
- **Cost-Push:** Inflation that occurs when increases in production costs push
up the prices of final goods and services

##### Measuring Inflation

**Consumer Price Index (CPI):** An index of the prices of a "shopping basket" of
goods and services purchased by consumers.

**Product Price Index (PPI):** An index of the prices paid by producers and
wholesalers for various commodities such as raw materials, partially finished
goods, and finished products.

---

### Bank of Canada's Usage of Monetary Policy, and How Governments Use Fiscal Policy to Achieve Macroeconomic Goals

#### Monetary Policy
Bank of Canada's programs for controlling the amount of money circulating in the
economy and controlling interest rates.

**Contractionary Policy:** Bank of Canada restricts or tightens the money supply
by selling government securities or raising interest rates.

**Expansionary Policy:** Bank of Canada increases, or loosens growth in the
money supply, stimulating the economy. Interest rates decline, so business and
consumer spending go up.

#### Fiscal Policy
The government's use of taxation and spending to affect the economy.

**Spending:**

**Taxation:**
