---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter 7"
desc:   "Analyzing the Business"
date:   2016-02-25 10:15:00 -0600
category: BUS-1201
permalink: /bus-1201/chapter7/
---

### Describe the critical success factors and how to measure them

#### Critical Success Factors
- Encourage creativity and innovation
- Achieving financial performance
- Meet and exceed customers' needs
- Provide value &mdash; quality products at reasonable price
- Gain employee commitment

---

### SWOT Analysis, and how to use it

#### SWOT
Internal Factors

__Strengths:__

__Weaknesses:__

External Factors

__Opportunities:__
Syrian refugees can attend the university

__Threats:__
Other colleges aren't really threats, but other universities that have the same demographic target as UofW do are a threat.

#### Steps in SWOT
1. Where have we been?
  1. Past strats and structure. _See what worked for us._
2. Where are we now?
  1. What are the internal strengths and weaknesses?
  2. How is the external environment affecting us?

#### Porter's Five Forces Model
1. Risk of new entry by potential competitors.
2. Degree of rivalry among existing competitors. _Have some rivalry, but not be cut throat_
3. The bargaining power of buyers.
  - Number of buyers
  - Switching costs to use another product of supplier
  - Brand identity
  - Threat of backward integration
4. Bargaining power of suppliers. _More suppliers is better for businesses, because they won't get screwed by the one supplier_
  - Number of suppliers
  - Size of suppliers
  - Product differentiation
  - Buyers' switching costs
  - Ability to substitute
5. Threat of substitute products.
  - Price difference
  - Quality difference
  - Performance difference
  - Cost of switching
  - Buyers' willingness to substitute

---

### Understand the basic framework for analyzing the business

#### Analyzing the Strategy

_What are the competencies and competitive advantages?_

- What is the core strength?
- What can we do better than the competition?
- What distinctive advantage do we have that customers value?
- Is there a sustainable competitive advantage?

#### Analyzing the Corporate-level strategy

__Vision:__ Clear concise picture of the company's future direction (used as guide and inspiration)

_Like Red River's "classrooms of the future" not having those old overheads and use stuff like projectors_

__Mission:__ Clear, concise articulation of how the company intends to achieve its vision and how it is different from the competition.

_How are we different from everybody else, what will make people want to come here?_

#### Analyze Business-level strategy

How a company decides to compete in the businesses it chose to be in

Porter's Five Forces have some generic competitive positions:

- Cost leadership
  - Superstore &mdash; cheap things
- Product differentiation
  - Tim Hortons &mdash; compared to Starbucks, Tim Hortons has more locations, and more to offer, and cheaper coffee
- Focus differentiation
  - Mr. Big & Tall &mdash; for people that are big and tall, because other stores don't serve people of that size very well, so they attracted a market of people

---

### Methods for analyzing the financial position of the company

#### Financial Statements

Pro forma financials (estimates future)

Ration Analysis __(not on the test)__

Cost/benefit analysis

---

### Trends in analyzing the business

#### Future of Analyzing Business

Customers

Environment

Society
